1. Core Concepts

Mutt is a text-based application which interacts with users through different 
menus which are mostly line-/entry-based or page-based. A line-based menu is the 
so-called “index” menu (listing all messages of the currently opened folder) or 
the “alias” menu (allowing you to select recipients from a list). Examples for 
page-based menus are the “pager” (showing one message at a time) or the “help” 
menu listing all available key bindings.

The user interface consists of a context sensitive help line at the top, the 
menu's contents followed by a context sensitive status line and finally the 
command line. The command line is used to display informational and error 
messages as well as for prompts and for entering interactive commands.

Mutt is configured through variables which, if the user wants to permanently use 
a non-default value, are written to configuration files. Mutt supports a rich 
config file syntax to make even complex configuration files readable and 
commentable.

Because Mutt allows for customizing almost all key bindings, there are so-called 
“functions” which can be executed manually (using the command line) or in 
macros. Macros allow the user to bind a sequence of commands to a single key or 
a short key sequence instead of repeating a sequence of actions over and over.

Many commands (such as saving or copying a message to another folder) can be 
applied to a single message or a set of messages (so-called “tagged” messages). 
To help selecting messages, Mutt provides a rich set of message patterns (such 
as recipients, sender, body contents, date sent/received, etc.) which can be 
combined into complex expressions using the boolean and and or operations as 
well as negating. These patterns can also be used to (for example) search for 
messages or to limit the index to show only matching messages.

Mutt supports a “hook” concept which allows the user to execute arbitrary 
configuration commands and functions in certain situations such as entering a 
folder, starting a new message or replying to an existing one. These hooks can 
be used to highly customize Mutt's behavior including managing multiple 
identities, customizing the display for a folder or even implementing 
auto-archiving based on a per-folder basis and much more.

Besides an interactive mode, Mutt can also be used as a command-line tool only 
send messages. It also supports a mailx(1)-compatible interface, see Table 9.1, 
“Command line options” for a complete list of command-line options.
2. Screens and Menus
2.1. Index

The index is the screen that you usually see first when you start Mutt. It gives 
an overview over your emails in the currently opened mailbox. By default, this 
is your system mailbox. The information you see in the index is a list of 
emails, each with its number on the left, its flags (new email, important email, 
email that has been forwarded or replied to, tagged email, ...), the date when 
email was sent, its sender, the email size, and the subject. Additionally, the 
index also shows thread hierarchies: when you reply to an email, and the other 
person replies back, you can see the other person's email in a "sub-tree" below. 
This is especially useful for personal email between a group of people or when 
you've subscribed to mailing lists.
2.2. Pager

The pager is responsible for showing the email content. On the top of the pager 
you have an overview over the most important email headers like the sender, the 
recipient, the subject, and much more information. How much information you 
actually see depends on your configuration, which we'll describe below.

Below the headers, you see the email body which usually contains the message. If 
the email contains any attachments, you will see more information about them 
below the email body, or, if the attachments are text files, you can view them 
directly in the pager.

To give the user a good overview, it is possible to configure Mutt to show 
different things in the pager with different colors. Virtually everything that 
can be described with a regular expression can be colored, e.g. URLs, email 
addresses or smileys.
2.3. File Browser

The file browser is the interface to the local or remote file system. When 
selecting a mailbox to open, the browser allows custom sorting of items, 
limiting the items shown by a regular expression and a freely adjustable format 
of what to display in which way. It also allows for easy navigation through the 
file system when selecting file(s) to attach to a message, select multiple files 
to attach and many more.
2.4. Help

The help screen is meant to offer a quick help to the user. It lists the current 
configuration of key bindings and their associated commands including a short 
description, and currently unbound functions that still need to be associated 
with a key binding (or alternatively, they can be called via the Mutt command 
prompt).
2.5. Compose Menu

The compose menu features a split screen containing the information which really 
matter before actually sending a message by mail: who gets the message as what 
(recipients and who gets what kind of copy). Additionally, users may set 
security options like deciding whether to sign, encrypt or sign and encrypt a 
message with/for what keys. Also, it's used to attach messages, to re-edit any 
attachment including the message itself.
2.6. Alias Menu

The alias menu is used to help users finding the recipients of messages. For 
users who need to contact many people, there's no need to remember addresses or 
names completely because it allows for searching, too. The alias mechanism and 
thus the alias menu also features grouping several addresses by a shorter 
nickname, the actual alias, so that users don't have to select each single 
recipient manually.
2.7. Attachment Menu

As will be later discussed in detail, Mutt features a good and stable MIME 
implementation, that is, it supports sending and receiving messages of arbitrary 
MIME types. The attachment menu displays a message's structure in detail: what 
content parts are attached to which parent part (which gives a true tree 
structure), which type is of what type and what size. Single parts may saved, 
deleted or modified to offer great and easy access to message's internals. 
